
= Download and install =[install]
AS has been tested on GNU/Linux and Mac OS X, but should probably be compilable
on other POSIX conformant operating systems as well.

AS is free software and is released under the terms of
[GNU General Public License COPYING].
Sourcecode and binary packages are available at http://kymatica.com/algoscore

There is no need to //install// AS to a specific location,
it's a self-contained application directory.

See the [ChangeLog ChangeLog] for recent changes.

== GNU/Linux ==
Since version 080417 the pre-built binary was removed, you need to
build AS from source. (see below)

=== Dependencies ===
- [CMake #cmake] 2.4.7 (build dependency only)
- [JACK #jack] 0.100.0 (0.102.27 or later for MIDI support)
- [Csound #csound] 5.x
- [Libsndfile #libsndfile] 1.x
- [GTK+ #gtk] 2.8 or later
- PCRE (optional, for regex functions)
- LibLo 0.24 (optional, for OSC support)


=== Building from source ===
Make sure you have the dependencies listed above installed. Note that on a
distro with separate dev-packages you need to install those too.

You also need to install [CMake #cmake] 2.4.7 or later.

Download the source package and unpack it somewhere,
then do the following in the shell:
```
cd AlgoScore/src
export CFLAGS="-O2"
./make_build
```
% In version 080406 you need to remove the old ``algoscore`` binary before
% running ``make_build`` so that it can be rebuilt.

The "-O2" compiler flag is needed to avoid a crash due to a compiler bug.

If you want to make a clean rebuild, remove the old ``build`` folder first.

=== Running ===
Start AS by running the ``algoscore`` binary
from within the top-level directory of the AS folder. It is important
that the binary is not moved from this location for AS
to find the included library files. You can go to the AS folder and run it
from there, or enter the full path, but you can not run it through a symlink.

If you're using [ROX-Filer #rox], you should be able to start AS
by just double-clicking it, and it will try to compile itself the first time.

The first time you start AS, it will notify you that a folder for custom userdata
was not found and offer you to create one. The default location for this is
``algoscore_data`` under your home folder.

== Mac OS X ==[osxinstall]
On OS X, the simplest approach is probably to download the pre-built
AlgoScore.app application bundle.

If you need or want to compile from source on OS X, see [this section #osxbuild]
at the end of this document.

=== Dependencies ===
- [CsoundLib #csound] 5.x or later (framework and it's SupportLibs package)
- [JackOSX #jack] 0.76 or later


You should install JackOSX **after** Csounds SupportLibs package, since csound will
overwrite your current jack library otherwise.

Note that X11 is no longer needed.

=== Running ===
Start [Jack #jack] (through JackPilot) and then AS.

The first time you start AS, it will notify you that a folder for custom userdata
was not found and offer you to create one. The default location for this is
``algoscore_data`` under your home folder.

