
= Other software =
This section contains short descriptions of various software related to building
or running AS. The descriptions below are based on each projects own wordings
from their websites.

== Nasal ==[nasal]
Nasal is an embeddable scripting language, with features like dynamic typing,
garbage collection, and a small footprint. The syntax is similar to C and
JavaScript, and is easy to learn.

Most of AS is written in Nasal, and it has a built-in Nasal interpreter with
bindings to GTK, Cairo, Csound, and more.

More information and documentation: http://plausible.org/nasal

== JACK ==[jack]
JACK Audio Connection Kit is a low-latency audio server, written for POSIX
conformant operating systems such as GNU/Linux and Apple's OS X. It can connect
a number of different applications to an audio device, as well as allowing them
to share audio between themselves. Recent versions also supports MIDI.

AS uses JACK to play audio and MIDI.

More information and downloads: http://jackaudio.org

== Csound ==[csound]
Csound is a sound design, music synthesis and signal processing system,
providing facilities for composition and performance over a wide range of
platforms. It is not restricted to any style of music, having been used for many
years in the creation of classical, pop, techno, ambient, experimental, and (of
course) computer music, as well as music for film and television.

More information and downloads: http://csounds.com

== Libsndfile ==[libsndfile]
Libsndfile is a C library for reading and writing files containing sampled sound
(such as MS Windows WAV and the Apple/SGI AIFF format) through one standard
library interface.

More information and downloads: http://www.mega-nerd.com/libsndfile

% == X11 ==[x11]
% X Window System provides the standard toolkit and protocol with which to build
% graphical user interfaces (GUIs) on most Unix-like operating systems.
% See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X11 for more information.
%
% It is included by default in most Linux distributions. X11 for Mac OS X can
% be installed from the installation DVD or downloaded from the net.
% See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X11.app for details.

== ROX-Filer ==[rox]
ROX is a fast, user friendly desktop which makes extensive use of drag-and-drop.
The interface revolves around the file manager, or filer, following the
traditional Unix view that "everything is a file" rather than trying to hide the
filesystem beneath start menus, wizards, or druids. The aim is to make a system
that is well designed and clearly presented.

AS does not depend on ROX in any way, but the source package ships with an
AppRun script that makes it easy to start AS under ROX.

More information and downloads: http://rox.sf.net

== GTK+ ==[gtk]
GTK+ is a highly usable, feature rich toolkit for creating
graphical user interfaces which boasts cross platform compatibility and an easy
to use API.

More information and downloads: http://gtk.org

== XCodeTools ==[xcode]
Xcode is Apple's premiere development environment for Mac OS X.
It includes the powerful GCC compiler and other tools needed for building
applications from source.

In addition to being packaged on the DVD with every copy of Mac OS X, the latest
Xcode can be downloaded at Apple's developer website.

See http://developer.apple.com/tools/xcode for more information.

== MacPorts ==[macports]
The MacPorts Project is an open-source community initiative to design an
easy-to-use system for compiling, installing, and upgrading either command-line,
X11 or Aqua based open-source software on the  Mac OS X operating system.

More information and downloads: http://www.macports.org

== CMake ==[cmake]
CMake is a cross-platform, open-source build system. It is
used to control the software compilation process using simple platform and
compiler independent configuration files. CMake generates native makefiles and
workspaces that can be used in the compiler environment of your choice.

More information and downloads: http://www.cmake.org
